
# Beekeeping Topics for October

<div class="article">

  ## Equipment Storage

  For those beekeepers that are not wintering over their bees and will start with fresh packages next year, it is time to think about the best way to store away all the stuff that we used during the summer. Perhaps the biggest problem that we face is the problems that can be caused by the mice. Mice (or voles) can destroy frames of comb by chewing through them in search of food. The pollen that is mixed with or covered with honey is especially attractive to them. All of your equipment that is free of bees can be stored either inside or outside, as temperatures do not harm it. I prefer to store mine outside because I don't have room for the car in the garage if I include a few hives. Some beekeepers simply screen off the entrance with some hardware cloth that can keep mice out. One-fourth inch mesh works well for this and allows some ventilation to the hive. Moisture in the hive can encourage the growth of mold so it is a good idea to get some air circulation going through the hive. If your bees are still alive this method also works because the bees are small enough to go through the mesh. A queen excluder placed on the bottom board will also do quite well with all the supers stacked over it. This is tougher for the bees to go through so if you are wintering over the queen excluder may not be a good idea. Wind can take its toll on freshly drawn comb if it is very cold during the time that the wind is blowing. I had a few covers blow off last winter and the frames that were on the top super had many places where the wind eroded the fresh comb that had been drawn a few months before. Most beekeepers know that wax is very fragile when it gets cold particularly the comb that has not been used a few times for raising brood. The stack of supers that falls over in the winter wind is very likely to sustain damage to the combs. If this happens care should be taken in the pick up to ensure that there is no extra damage is caused by the beekeeper. If you are going to do some winter maintenance on your hives and plan on getting them from outside storage later in the winter be sure to bring them in on a fairly mild day to avoid damaging the wax. There are advantages to the colder weather maintenance though... propolis removal is very easy as it pops right off when it is frozen.

</div>
<div class="article">

  ## Classroom Presentations

  Well it is that time of year again. School has started and teachers are looking for interesting speakers to address young minds. If you should be so lucky to have the opportunity to address classes of students don't pass it up. It can be a real good time.

  I usually spend about an hour in the class with the kids and start with discussions of what a honeybee is and go from there to why we have bees and what they do for us on this planet of ours. Most of the children are surprised to find out that about a third of our food crops are pollinated crops and it is almost always the really tasty ones. Be sure to name some of the foods that they would like, apples, watermelons and things like that. Kids are fascinated with the sting of a honeybee so expect to spend some time in that area of discussion. I try to let the children know that we breed the bees for gentle behavior and that the honeybee has no attitude issues like the yellow jackets. I do a short math lesson about the number of stings it tales to get killed by a bunch of bees because someone always wants to know and usually will ask. 7 to 10 stings per pound is the figure that I use which is pretty easy to figure out the number of bees that would have to sting me. I figure somewhere around 1,500 stings and let them know that I would have to roll around in a hive to get that many.

  Pictures are great as well as the tools that we use. I usually go into the class with a hive and a box of beekeeping paraphernalia on a hand truck or two wheel dolly. I can get it all in one trip which lets you know about how much stuff you need to bring. My hive has a deep and a medium super with some foundation as well as drawn comb. It is really handy to have something to show the kids when you are explaining the life cycle of the bee and the activities of the hive. Pictures are great and if you can bring a set. I use the study prints that Dadant sells which are the same prints that we have in the demonstration booth at the fair. Mine are not framed and they are easy to hang up on the chalk board as I talk about them. I generally don't talk about all of them but it is handy to have props to get you back on track if you loose your place in your presentation.

  Definitely bring your smoker and your veil. Children love to touch things and see things up close. I also bring a box of burr comb so that there are things to pass around the classroom.

  I also bring a box of spoons and a bottle of honey for the kids to taste if I don't have a frame that has not been extracted yet. If you are lucky enough to have a frame of honey you can uncap with a fork and offer samples of real honey right off the face of the comb. It is a real hit!

</div>
<div class="article">

  ## Storage of Hives

  I am sure that at some time I have written an article on storage of equipment but since I can't remember when it was I thought that I would write another one (it is that time of year again). Hopefully there are members of the organization that are storing their equipment for the winter that have bees still in them so I will make mention of some pertinent items if interest to them before I get too carried away. Even though a hive that is over wintering is full of bees it really has very little defense mechanisms in place. Summer hives have guards posted at the entrance to keep any unwanted visitors away. This is not true when it comes to cold weather. Cool weather to us Alaskans is bitter cold in bee degrees. Remember that a bee can't move unless its own body temperature is above 45 degrees. That is about the temperature that it got up to this afternoon. I saw yellow jackets around the hives but no bees. Yellow jackets are built for these temperatures and can keep messing with the wintering hive. Entrance reducers should be on the hive to keep things warmer inside as well as keep the entrance small enough to restrict the easy access of the yellow jackets. Bees can still get out and about in these times but they don't need very much of an opening to do so. Mice also enter hives that have bees in them and will chew out the pollen that has been stored in the lower section of the combs. I pulled off the lids of a couple of hives a couple of days ago and the bees were in a compact cluster. Those that were on the outside of the cluster buzzed their wings and raised their stingers in the air but were not inclined to fly. I took the frames apart and noted that the bees in the center of the cluster were warm enough to make the quick launch and they were quite lively. The point that I am making is that as the weather turns cooler destructive pests can get quite close to the cluster without penalty and do some serious damage. If you have not reduced the size of the entrance yet now is not too late, just make sure that you don't trap the mouse inside the hive.

  For those beekeepers that have hives that are empty of bees and are putting them away for the season here is some advice as well. Drawn comb is the most important item that a beekeeper can possess so whatever you can do to keep it from being chewed on is not wasted effort. Simply stacking up the boxes on the bottom board and screening off the entrance with quarter inch mesh (or eighth inch mesh) allows ventilation and will work pretty well. A metal queen excluder works well as a mouse screen and that can be placed on the top allowing a flow of air throughout the hive. If it is possible to put the hive away after the bees have licked the supers clean there will be less moisture and a lower chance that you will have mould develop. Remember that honey is hydroscopic which means that it will draw moisture to it and moisture is what is needed to get any layer of fungus to grow. Any drops of honey seem to grow in size during the damp times of late fall and early winter. Good dry airflow helps keep this from happening.

  Cold does not seem to have much effect on comb except to make it brittle. When the frames are warmed enough this effect is lost and it is safe to store hives outside in sub zero temperatures without problems. Just don't move them around during the cold part of winter and they should be fine. Each year there seem to be a number of beekeepers that report that the wind blew their hives over. If it happens in the cold part of winter expect that there will be some damage done particularly to the new wax areas. Plastic foundation holds up better than pure wax but when the whole super takes a dive to the ground the wax may separate from the foundation causing the bees to have to start over in whole areas.

  Winter is traditionally the time when repairs are made to the hive components so be sure to set things out that need some extra attention.

</div>
<div class="article">

  ## Wax and Candles

  As many of you know beeswax is produced by young bees in the hive. Bees that are about 12 days old seem best suited to the production of wax. Bees that are older can also produce wax although they don't do it as well as the younger bees. There are stimulating factors that can be used to prompt the older bees to produce more wax. As we all know, workers produce wax very well when there is a nectar flow on or when we feed heavy sugar syrup. We use this knowledge when we lift the inner cover and see those white specks of new wax on the top bars. Lots of white specks should tell us to super up.

  As we know bees produce wax on the underside of the abdomen in specialized glands that are suited just for this purpose. The wax when it is first secreted is clear but quickly turns white when exposed to air. The ultimate color of the wax seems to be largely related to pollen flow and other contaminants found in the hive. Most wax ends up as a yellowish color. Wax is worked into shape with the mouth of the bee. Bees also move wax around in the hive wherever the demand seems to be. We can find this in the brood chambers as often the bees have capped the honey with that really tough wax that seems to be recycled from old brood comb.

  As beekeepers we deal with wax throughout the season with the removal of burr comb, miss-drawn comb and cappings from the harvest process.

  So what do we do with this wax that we have been collecting over the season and perhaps over the years? Wax has been a valuable resource for centuries. It has been used as a waterproofing substance, polishes, and as money. In Greek mythology Pan used it to make a type of flute by sticking reeds together with beeswax. That was clever because I think Pan pipes sound pretty nice. Icarus thought beeswax would be valuable to stick feathers together and make a set of wings. In this particular case he was wrong though...

  I think that by far when most people think of beeswax they think of candles. This is very likely the most common use of the extra wax that has been produced by the backyard hive. There are advantages of the use of bees wax to make candles out of. One of the main advantages is the cleanliness of burn. Most candles made from paraffin send up a fair bit of smoke and soot during the burning process. Beeswax candles burn much cleaner and very little smoke is produced. While this may not be a huge difference to the occasional candle on the dining table it does make a tremendous difference in churches where candles are routinely lit. The need for candles in the church was one of the factors that caused the Spanish to bring bees to the new world.

  Beeswax candles also burn longer and drip less than the paraffin candles that are so common these days.

  So how do we go about turning that pile of cappings into something more useful? First we have to drain the honey off very well. It is amazing how long honey will drip out of the wax. I try to keep the process warm to aid the honey in flowing out and leave the cappings to drip over a pan. A queen excluder works pretty well as a straining screen and the cappings can be piled on top of that. You can contain the cappings from flowing over the edge of the excluder by using a bucket with the end cut out to hold the cappings in a pile.

  I have also heard of the practice of draining the cappings, and then adding some water and feeding the mix back to the bees in a container over the inner cover. The bees will leave the cappings behind and they will be pretty well free of residual honey.

  Once the wax is fairly well drained I melt it resulting mixture down in a bucket that sits in some hot water. Don't be tempted to heat beeswax directly over a heat source because is can burst into flame fairly easily if it gets too hot. Since I have a fair bit of wax to deal with I keep the bucket in hot water with the tank heater set for about 160 degrees or so. Bees wax melts at 147 degrees so this temperature is warm enough to melt the wax but not too hot as to scorch it (185 degrees) and change its color. If you have ever melted wax before I would be sure that you have seen the sludge that floats just below the molten wax. This sludge (referred to as slum gum) has to be kept out of the wax. Below the sludge will be honey that of course has been overheated and darkened. It is still good honey for cooking with but not all that great for the table. In my method the honey is the last thing to come out of the process so it stays hot for days.

  I keep adding cappings to the mixture until there is a good layer of wax on the top that can be ladled off and run through a nylon cloth. Things will float on the top of the wax layer and will be strained out with the cloth (this is where the bees knees will be). The strainer cloth that I use is the same weave that is used for the honey prior to bottling. I have a piece over a bucket that is held in place with a bunch of clothes pins. I use an old yogurt container to ladle the wax out because I have discovered that whatever has been used for wax work cannot be cleaned to my wife's specifications. As I ladle off the wax I add more cappings so that the bucket stays full. Eventually I end up with a block of wax that is in the bottom of a bucket that is clean and filtered. This is the wax that is used for candles and molds.

  At this point I heat the bucket of filtered wax and pour it off to smaller containers that are a more useful size. I use salad trays from the local store to pour into. They cost about a dime each and you can use the top as well as the bottom to pour into. These are the blocks of wax that I use when making candles. There are lots of ways to make candles and I will talk only about a couple of them in this short article.

  Perhaps the most important part of the candle is the wick that is used. Candle making supplies can be had at fabric and craft stores as well as the big box variety stores that seem to be popping up everywhere nowadays (Wal-Mart and the like). Most all of them sell wicks and included on the package is a size recommendation for the diameter of the candle. This can be a useful starting point but I would always make and test a candle before making a bunch of them. If the wick is too small the candle won't put out enough light or heat to melt the wax all the way to the edge of the candle. If the wick is too large then the candle will burn too quickly with a large flame. It is better to know this before you make a bunch of them and give them out as holiday gifts.

  I melt wax in basically the same fashion that I did for the filtering process except on a smaller scale. I use a fairly tall can set in a pan of hot water on top of the stove in the kitchen. Blocks and chunks of wax are placed in the can and the heat of the water melts the wax. I often preheat the blocks of wax in the microwave oven before I put them into the can to speed up the process. A word of caution here though = remember to monitor the situation closely. We are dealing with a substance that is supposed to heat up and then burst into flame and we want that to happen after the wax is turned into candles and not in the microwave or on the stovetop. I keep a thermometer in the water bath to keep an eye on the temperature. For dipping candles I think that the right temperature of the wax is near its melting point. If the wax is too hot it won't put a good layer on the candle. If it is too cold then the candles that are dipped have too much taper to them.

  Wax can be poured into decorative molds with wicks in place and make some nice looking candles. These are easy to make and one of the nice things about beeswax is that it has very little shrinkage compared to paraffin so that one pour is usually all that is required. I have always favored the hand dipped look as a gift item that can accompany a bottle of honey.

  Dipping candles is a really straight forward process. I start with a wick that is long enough to make two candles at the same time and hold the wick in the middle. We often do candles as a family and that way we can all make two pair - one set for each hand. Once the wax is melted the wicks are dipped to the length of the desired candle. Each person gets to dip once for each set and then move to the back of the line. By the time it takes to get back to the pot the wax has hardened and cooled and is ready for another coat. I straighten the candles before they get any thicker than a birthday candle and while they are still warm so don't fret that the first couple of dips result in a curly candle. If you let the candles get much thicker than a birthday candle and try to straighten them then they will crack in the process.

  I have found that it is best to get the candle into and out of the melted wax fairly quickly. The idea is to keep the candle cool so that the wax builds up nicely on it. If you find that the bottom of the candle is noticeably thicker than the top half you can leave the bottom of the candle in the pot longer and some of it will melt away. Sometimes we take a break and put the candles outside to cool. Refrigerator and freezer seem to work well too. When the candle gets to about its final thickness it retains a fair bit of heat and the wax doesn't build up as rapidly. Just prior to the last dipping I give the candle a good look over and remove any imperfections and get the bottom to the right size to fit into a holder. I carve this with a kitchen knife if Donna is not looking or use my pocket knife if she is. The last dip will blend everything together and complete the process.

  One thing that you will notice is that over time there will be a white powder that will form on the candle from the natural chemicals coming to the surface. If you are making your Christmas gifts now, be sure to buff this off with a soft cloth before you give them out. The white bloom on a beeswax candle is said to be an indicator of the purity of the wax.

  Remember that the whole point of beekeeping, making honey, vinegar, and dipping candles is to have fun!

</div>
