
# Beekeeping Topics for September

<div class="article">

  ## Harvest Methods

  I think that most beekeepers in the area use a bee brush to get the bees off the frames of honey. It is a pretty straightforward method of holding each frame up and brushing the bees back into the hive. Even though it is simplistic there are always a few things that can be done to make the job more pleasant. I have found that the times that I have used this method I have had the least amount of stings if I move the hive first. Every super that I intend to take home with me I move to a new location about 2 or 3 steps away.

  If I am taking the whole hive I work the brood chamber first into a super of bare foundation that is located in the old hive spot. It is nice to have the queen in the hive with the first batch of bees so that you don't have to wonder where she is. There are less bees flying during the first frames that are shaken and you have more of a chance to spot the queen. I use a shake and brush method and end up handling the frames twice. It involves using an extra super and walking in a tight circle but I think that it saves time in the long run. Move the supers that you want to harvest to a stack a several feet from corner of the hive that you will be harvesting from. Have an empty super of the appropriate size located several feet from the other corner so that the supers form a triangle. You will be working in the middle of the triangle. I work right in front of the hive though it may not make any difference in a practical sense. I want the bees to be in their familiar flight path so that they go to the hive instead of back to the stack of supers. I place the super full of bees on a deboxer and separate the frames from each other so that they are not all stuck together and easy to grab. I use a pair of needle nose pliers as a pointed wedge to pop the frames apart. It is faster than a hive tool and will not squish any bees; just a straight downward push will wedge the frames apart smoothly.

  The process is really pretty straightforward: grab a frame by the frame rests and move it over the hive, give it a few quick shakes and most of the bees will fall off. Set the frame into the new box and repeat the procedure until all the frames are shaken off. Once the box is full take the now empty super and use it to hold the frames after they have been brushed off with a bee brush. I relocate the new box about a step further away from the box of frames that have just been shaken. I pick up a frame by the center of the top bar and use the brush to brush the bees toward either end bar or brush them up toward the top bar. It takes less strokes of the brush if you brush toward the sides or toward the top bar because of the way the comb slants. I brush both sides before I turn around to place the frame into the going home box. Most of the bees won’t follow the comb when you turn around. The inner cover with a piece of tape over the hole makes a good lid to keep bees from getting back onto the combs.

  Another method I have used to move bees off the combs is using air power. A bee blower is pretty much the same thing as a leaf blower. The theory is that a good stream of air will blow the bees off the comb and they will fly back to the hive. Bees are used to the wind and as long as they are not blown into a solid object they will not suffer for the experience. Here are a few tips that I have used in blowing bees off the comb. The space at the bottom of the frame is larger than the space between the top bars of the frame. This means that you should blow the bees down from the top bars and out the bottom of the super. Tipping the super onto its end helps. I have had the most luck in moving bees with air power if you can catch them off guard. This means moving the nozzle of the blower back and forth over the area. Once the bee gets a chance to hang onto the comb it takes a hurricane to get them off. It is the gust of wind that gets them removed. I abandoned my bee blower in exchange for an air compressor with 50 feet of hose. I think that it works much better and I can get a quick blast with the standard blower valve by the press of a thumb. The stream of air is narrow enough that I can direct it between the frames without involving the space between the frames next to it. I can also use the air like a brush if I want to do each frame individually. Problems with using air to move bees is that the air flowing over the supers of honey really alerts the bees downwind and I have noticed that there has seemed to be more of a tendency for robbing to start up.

  This year I tried out a triangle escape board and can see the great potential that it has. Unfortunately I tried it late in the harvest so that my sample size for the test was rather limited. I put a stack of supers on a pallet and topped it with one of these devices as I worked the rest of the yard. After a few hours I looked under the escape board and discovered that there were only about a half dozen bees left in the stack. For those that don't know what a triangle escape board is (sometimes called a clearer board), it is not much more than an inner cover with a few slats of wood that form a triangle onone side of the board. The three pieces of wood do not touch at the tips of the triangle but instead make a passage way about 3/8 of an inch wide and an inch long that a bee can walk through. This triangle is inside another triangle of the same design (only larger) and the entire thing is covered with screen. The bees can go through the hole in the inner cover and find themselves inside a screen-covered triangle. They can leave this triangle at the corners and find themselves inside the second triangle, which they can also exit at the corners. For some reason they can’t seem to find their way back into the center the way they came out, but instead try to go straight back through the screen at the center. The triangle escape board works under the same principle as the bee escape, allowing the bees to go one way and preventing the return to the supers.

  Most of the times I have seen escape boards or bee escapes used they are in conjunction with fume boards. The use of a fume board is said to speed the process along giving an incentive for the bees to leave the area. For those that have never smelled the bee repellent that is used on a fume board take my word for it – it stinks! I have never used the stuff but have some in a container in the garage to do some experiments with. It was shipped in its own container within another container and the odor still went through with enough power to stink up the garage. I had to wrap it in two layers of aluminum foil just to keep it inside. I would imagine that the bees would leave the area rather quickly as they are reported to do. My concern would be that it would be another chemical that would potentially end up in the honey.

</div>
<div class="article">

  ## Caging the Queen

  For those of you that were at the July meeting you might remember that I was planning an experiment on checking the production of hives using different methods of queen management. I used a yard that had 25 hives in it and used 24 of them for the experiment. Eight of the hives I caged the queen in the usual manner using Roger Lewis' suggestion of a long cage over the top bars (August newsletter). Eight hives had the queens removed so that the hives would be queenless and raise their own queen. The last set of eight hives I used an excluder to confine the queen to the lower box. What I was looking for was two things. First was to get a comparative sense of the behavior of the bees within the hives. The question was: is one method stressful to the bees in such a manner that they can be more defensive of the hive? I was also looking at honey production from the different groups.

  What I found out was a bit of a surprise to me in that there seemed to be no noticeable difference between all of the hives. Honey production was statistically the same for all groups. As far as temperament goes there was little difference that I could tell between the hives as well.

  My conclusion was that there doesn't seem to be any reason to cage the queen to increase honey production. As always there is an unexpected revelation with any experiment if you keep your eyes open and here is what I learned from the experience.

  Harvestable honey production was lower in the hives that did not have the queen caged because the hatching brood kept me from bringing the frames into the extracting room. Although the bees gathered the same amount of honey it was easier to get from the hives that had the queen caged. I suppose that one could uncap and harvest this honey but for me the brood is too much of a deterrent.

  When you take into account the labor involved finding the queen and getting her into a cage seemed to be the most work involved and the subsequent check for emergency queen cells several days later. The least amount of work was keeping the queen in the lower box and checking for swarm cells on a regular basis.

  The brood did prove to be useful however. As many of you know, I use escape boards to clear the hives and this year I noticed that the boards did best if the bees were leaving the supers and going down to brood. I also shook out several hives and stacked the supers in the bee yard with escape boards on the top and bottom. As always there were a few bees hanging on to the combs and some refused to leave the honey super stacks. I put acouple of frames of comb that had brood into an empty super after shaking off most of the bees. I then placed this super with two frames on top of the stack of honey supers. The next morning all of the bees were on the brood and none were in the honey supers under them. It was a fairly easy matter to lift the super off with the bees and set it aside so that the supers underneath could be loaded into the truck before the bees started to come back in.

  Of course the above study and the management of the hives was done without regard to the implications on wintering the bees over. If wintering were part of the plan then it would be pretty clear that the break in the brood cycle would have an impact on the ability of the hives to make it through a normal winter.

</div>
<div class="article">

  ## Wet Honey

  I have had several people contact me about what to do with honey that seems too runny.

  1. Should I try to dry it?

  Trying to dry honey that has been extracted can be a pretty tough thing to do but it can be done. It is better to dry the honey in the frames before you extract. The surface of the honey is where ti does the drying and the most surface exposed is on the face of the frame. Stacking the supers up so that a fan can circulate air through them can make a big difference. I used this method on a number of supers this year that were not capped and combined air flow with a room dehumidifier and pulled several percentage points of water out of the honey. Once the honey is extracted it is tough to get it to dry out without adding heat and time into the equation. Heat for any lengthy time will darken honey, remove flavor, and denature enzymes. The deeper the bucket the less surface area is exposed to air and the longer it will take to dry.

  2. Should I mix it with my thicker honey?

  If you have some very dry honey this might be the thing to do with it. Before you do this it would be very helpful to know what the moisture levels are in each batch and do a small mix to see if the numbers work out right. I worry a lot if honey is above 20% moisture content. Sugar tolerant yeasts that are naturally present in honey can begin to grow and we all should know that yeast growing in a sweet plant juice yields wine or vinegar. Both of these are pretty nice products if the brewer controls the process but if you just let the honey ferment on its own the results will be far from palatable. (I will save mead making for another newsletter) Tang made some good honey vinegar and perhaps she will work up a how to make vinegar article for some future newsletter as well.

  3. How should I bottle it?

  This honey can be bottled like any other honey but realize that it has a shorter shelf life and shouldn't be sold as regular honey because the consumer expects honey to be shelf stable and technically it could be argued that it is not even honey because it is not fully cured yet. Probably best to call it a syrup, nectar, or something other than honey. However, wet honey generally has better flavor and smells better than fully cured honey. It makes great syrups and toppings as well as sweetener for teas, oatmeal, and the like.

  4. How should I store it?

  From the books that I have read, wet honey will not ferment if it is stored at temperatures below 50 degrees. Apparently, yeast needs a bit of a temperature to make it go. Also it can be pasteurized but that pulls aroma and flavor out.

  One thing to think about is that honey when it crystallizes increases in moisture content as the solids (sugar molecules) leave the moisture behind as they build into crystals. Depending on how the honey sets up the free moisture can build by three or four percent quite easily. This is something to consider if you mixed the wet with the dry honey and got the total batch down to 18 or 19 percent moisture. Make sure that it is less likely to crystallize by filtering it pretty well and heating it up prior to storage. I don't mean to imply that this heat is the heat of pasteurization but rather the heat to retard crystal formation. Somewhere in the area of 120 to 125 degrees should be sufficient to keep it liquid for a number of months. While I am not sure what the temperature needs to be to pasteurize honey I would expect it to be in the range of 160 degrees or so.

  If you would like to have your honey measured for water content bring some to the meeting or send a sample to Steve at the return address on this newsletter. You can put some honey in a soda straw and heat seal the ends of the straw. Stick it in a zip lock bag in case it leaks and mail it off. Testing requires about a drop of honey, so a half-length straw is more than enough to do the job.

</div>
<div class="article">

  ## Classroom Presentations

  Well it is that time of year again. School has started and teachers are looking for interesting speakers to address young minds. If you should be so lucky to have the opportunity to address classes of students don't pass it up. It can be a real good time.

  I usually spend about an hour in the class with the kids and start with discussions of what a honeybee is and go from there to why we have bees and what they do for us on this planet of ours. Most of the children are surprised to find out that about a third of our food crops are pollinated crops and it is almost always the really tasty ones. Be sure to name some of the foods that they would like, apples, watermelons and things like that. Kids are fascinated with the sting of a honeybee so expect to spend some time in that area of discussion. I try to let the children know that we breed the bees for gentle behavior and that the honeybee has no attitude issues like the yellow jackets. I do a short math lesson about the number of stings it tales to get killed by a bunch of bees because someone always wants to know and usually will ask. 7 to 10 stings per pound is the figure that I use which is pretty easy to figure out the number of bees that would have to sting me. I figure somewhere around 1,500 stings and let them know that I would have to roll around in a hive to get that many.

  Pictures are great as well as the tools that we use. I usually go into the class with a hive and a box of beekeeping paraphernalia on a hand truck or two wheel dolly. I can get it all in one trip which lets you know about how much stuff you need to bring. My hive has a deep and a medium super with some foundation as well as drawn comb. It is really handy to have something to show the kids when you are explaining the life cycle of the bee and the activities of the hive. Pictures are great and if you can bring a set. I use the study prints that Dadant sells which are the same prints that we have in the demonstration booth at the fair. Mine are not framed and they are easy to hang up on the chalk board as I talk about them. I generally don't talk about all of them but it is handy to have props to get you back on track if you loose your place in your presentation.

  Definitely bring your smoker and your veil. Children love to touch things and see things up close. I also bring a box of burr comb so that there are things to pass around the classroom.

  I also bring a box of spoons and a bottle of honey for the kids to taste if I don't have a frame that has not been extracted yet. If you are lucky enough to have a frame of honey you can uncap with a fork and offer samples of real honey right off the face of the comb. It is a real hit!

</div>
<div class="article">

  ## Classroom Visits

  School Presentations can be lots of fun for both the beekeeper and the students. I try to have several hives that I have set aside just for that purpose when we head into winter. Observation hives can be stocked and last for quite a few days allowing several presentations to be done before the bees eat all the honey and the brood hatches out. Having a marked queen is an advantage because the kids all will want to see her. I have done a number of presentations at local schools and thought that I would pass on some of the things that seem to work out pretty well.

  I talk first and show the bees last. Once the cover is off the observation hive it is pretty hard to shift the focus, so the role of pollination and food supplies is usually first on the list. A third of our food supply is related to the honeybee and the kids are pretty surprised that there is a relationship between the activity of the honeybee and the hamburger that they eat (alfalfa is a pollinated crop).

  There is so much that can be tied to the goings on in a beehive that we see here in society and kids really like to see the connections. One of my favorites is talking about how the girls do all the work and the boys just sit around the hive and eat honey all day. The boys in the classes think this is pretty cool until they hear the story of the eviction of the drones. Teachers love this story because you can tie it to homework and work ethics.

  Of course stings are always a hot topic of discussion. The gentleness of the honeybee is almost always compared to the attitude of the yellow jacket, which has no penalty for stinging. I try to get the point across that beekeeping is not dangerous and the bees sting only for a good reason. Children can understand that if you were being squished or if someone were wrecking your house you would have a good reason to sting them. I almost always try to do a little math with the children and use the USDA Bee lab findings of 7 stings per pound of body weight for a critical dose. This means way over a thousand stings for somebody like me, 700 for the average 5 th grader. I would have to just about roll around in a pile of bees to get that many.

  I always try to conclude the bee presentations with a taste of honey from the comb. It is pretty easy to uncap half of a frame with a fork. I carry a package of plastic spoons to catch the surface honey without digging into the comb very deeply. One side of a frame can give a taste sample to an entire classroom.

  I have a fact sheet that has a bunch of unrelated bee stuff written on it that kids can relate to and here are a few examples. I generally try to sprinkle these throughout the talk.

  * Bees fly about 12 to 15 miles per hour, which is about as fast as a kid on a bicycle.

  * It takes about 12 bees their entire lifetime to fill a teaspoon with honey.

  * A good queen can lay 2,000 eggs in a day.

  * A worker bee lives only about a month and a half in the summer because they wear themselves out gathering nectar for others.

  * Bees only take naps for about 5 minutes at a stretch but they never sleep like we do.

  * Bees talk to each other by smelling.

  * Adult bees eat nectar and honey which is full of energy but has nothing to build muscles with. The baby bees need pollen for this.

  * There are 56 to 60 thousand bees in a hive during the summer and almost all of them are sisters. There are only 4 to 5 hundred brothers.

  * People have been getting honey for over 6000 years from bees and only about a hundred years ago did we figure out how to get the honey without wrecking the hive.

  * Bees will fly up to a mile and a half from their home to find nectar and their navigation is so accurate that if you move the hive more than a couple of steps while they were gone they can't find it when they get back.

  * Flowers all look different, smell different, and taste different. The flower flavors the honey.

  * Red and black look the same to bees but they can see another purple that we can't.

  * Honeybees visit about 2 million flowers to make one pound of honey

</div>
